Felly, dyma Catherine McShane, interwyr i'r prosiect y Swicca Carnival,
Caerdydd Carnival, 25th Anniversari.
A fi yma gyda Sally McLennan, yw 19 October 2014,
a rydym yn y hostil ym Mhob ym Oakhampton gyda Samba Galez.
Sally, i'r recordio, gallwch chi ddod eich anffodus, yn fawr?
Ie, yw S-A-L-L-I-E-M-A-C-L-E-N-N-A-N.
How did you first get involved in Caerdydd Carnival then?
I first got involved through a boyfriend.
So after seeing the first one from Catays, I got involved the following year in 95.
And how were you involved? How did you first participate?
I think I was drumming with a band. I think it was with Hereford and Powys School of Samba.
Oh wow.
So which one was that?
So my memories are a little bit muddled.
There was one where it was all about food, the food carnival.
And the band that I was with, we had a black-based costume with barcodes attached to our costume.
So we were barcodes. And all the barcodes came off halfway through the parade.
And the other one that I'm getting a bit muddled with, so it was either that was the first one or the one with the section we were in was the desert.
And we were all kind of like desert colours and we had big skulls on our head.
So we were wearing like half, top half of our headdress was skulls and the bottom half was face paint.
And big sort of cloak style painted desert colour thing.
So it was a bit dead looking, but fun, really nice.
So I can't remember if that came first or the barcodes came first.
So that was one of my first ones.
So how many do you think you've done?
Has it been the worst constant?
No, definitely not. No, I had a really big gap.
So I think I did about four from Cotais.
I think then I did about perhaps three, if there was three from Chapter Us.
I would say perhaps I did about ten.
Was it always in drumming bands?
No, so no, I've danced quite a lot as well for Carnival.
A lot with Street Dance Union, a community dance group that I put together that paraded and performed with repercussions.
So repercussion was a band that grew from Powys and Hereford School of Samba.
So Powys and Hereford became repercussion and they took part in the Carnival a lot.
So I was a member of that group.
Some years I would drum with them and some years I would dance with them.
It interchanged.
And I usually can only remember what I did by the costumes, I guess, like most people.
So which costumes stick out in your mind?
OK, the costume that I enjoyed wearing more than anything.
We were based in Cotais. Don't remember the date.
And our section was called Cooling the Path.
And our section was kind of coordinated by Mohammed.
And it was a white base. It was quite flowy, a white base.
It was choreographed by Jane Bellamy and we had a green...
We were like leaves, so our costume base looked very natural.
It was a beautiful design. Amaro designed the costume.
It was very striking and very simple.
So we had a big green leaf-shaped tabard around our shoulders.
And a beautiful, almost elfin-like, large green pointed hat towards the back.
White face paint and we had green leaves painted on our cheekbones.
And it was really simple but we looked really striking as a group.
And we were a very gentle, flowing section.
And we had a song.
And it was the first... I think that was the first time I sang in public through a PA system to that many people.
It was my first... That was something like 95, 96.
Something around 96 perhaps.
And that was definitely from Cotais.
And we paraded to the museum steps where they had a built-up stage.
And they had a PA. I don't know if they used a PA much before that.
And it was one of my loveliest moments, that experience of silence in a whole crowd.
By singing a really beautiful, slow song.
I think Mohamed wrote it and I learnt it.
So that sticks out in my mind.
That sounds lovely.
How about the ridiculous costumes?
Which is the most ridiculous you've worn?
I think... Let's think.
I think the barcodes were quite ridiculous.
It was done in a bit of a rush and maybe a lot of that was to do with back then the visiting bands were very much involved and responsible for making the costumes.
As opposed to makers at the camp.
And because our band was based in mid Wales, really that only got done the day before or the day of the carnival and finished off.
So it was all done in a bit of a hurry.
And some of them were stapled on, some of them were glugunned on and they didn't stay.
There was one year where as we walked out from Cotais Community Centre onto Cotais Terrace, it was raining so much
that we had about an inch of water on the top of the surdues just from the entrance of the doorway to the road.
So I can't remember if that was the year that we wore the barcodes, if that was the food year.
I think the food year was good weather actually but that was quite a ridiculous costume.
And I think...
Not so much ridiculous but it was interesting.
We had a costume that was based from Chapter Arts Centre camp where all of my dancers were in silver costumes with surfboards on our back.
We were surfing the net and we were wearing surfboards so we danced a whole choreographed rehearsed set wearing surfboards.
Surfboards, that was interesting.
And I think the daffodils were pretty huge. We had big daffodils one year, danced in those.
But they were really lovely because they were very big, very striking.
Quite tricky to actually move in a choreographed way in.
But they were nice because they had really big bendy, what's it called around the edge of the fabric?
Bendy hoops so that you could manipulate the costume.
So do you have any, in terms of mass camp and being involved in the three week run up,
any memories from there in terms of people and the experience of the run up to Carnival?
Any particular memories from that side of it?
I mean my memories are mostly not very specific of certain things happening I don't think but more the general craziness,
the hustle and the sort of frenzy that builds up in Carnival towards the run up.
And I think years gone by when it was attended by a lot of people, my memories are just like organised chaos.
I mean a nice chaos, a chaos where people are hatching plans to steal people's glue guns and things like that
because they're up against time and so you're in a hall with hundreds of people,
hundreds of different types of people from different backgrounds looking over their shoulder to see who's using a glue gun and who's got scissors that work.
And that's my memory, I have like snapshots of that sort of panic of I've got to get this done and I really, really need that tool to do it.
So yeah my memories are like that, they're as opposed to anything specific happening.
Although I do remember a bubble of excitement towards like on the last day of camps years back when people would plan to, who would be doing the jab jabs?
Jab jabs are always really good fun and the painting, body painting and the powder and the kind of getting yourself into that ritualistic state of mind
where you're just downing tools and just going to run through the streets of Cardiff towards the end.
I mean I've got great memories of that, of chanting through the streets with not many people but it felt okay because you were with Amaru
and if Amaru was doing it then it was fine.
That's mission.
Yeah, yeah, yeah that's kind of what I remember a lot of.
And the relationships you build up with people, you get to know people.
You know to have an opportunity to sit at a table for a few hours and work, you get to know people that way because you work and you talk and you build relationships
and yeah that was good, getting to know people.
Especially in the early days, in my early years involvement with Carnival because I was getting to know people back then, I didn't really know many people there.
Any particular characters stick out in your mind?
Yeah I think for me again it's the characters are all from back then, it's back from mid to late 90s, Mohammed and Amaru and then a few people, Jane Bellamy, June
and people who, characters who are still kind of around and still with us like Keith, massive character, you know take Keith out of Carnival and it's not the same Carnival.
And Keith and David, yeah because you know you remember the people who have always been there.
The parade itself, any memories of any disasters or memorable moments on parade?
I don't remember any disasters, I do remember hearing about a parade that I was in, of course when you're in a parade you only really know what's going on in front of you
and maybe a little bit behind you if you're lucky and then nothing else because you can't see anything.
But I do remember the story of one of the parades I was in of one of the stilt walkers pyrotechnic set ups setting on fire.
At the wrong moment.
Yes at the wrong moment, yeah, yeah, yeah, not actually set itself alight. I think they were experimenting with pyros at the time.
So kind, I suppose that's a bit of a disaster although I didn't witness it, I heard about it second hand.
But I do have memories of, I think there was a real excitement on the parade when we took it down to the bay when it became,
but again earlier in the earlier years of being in the bay, like I suppose when was that, early 2000s when it would all finish and culminate in the oval basin.
So many people were there watching and it was, you had a, you know the streets were lovely walking the streets but when you got to the bay it was so open
that you were visible to a lot more people at that any particular moment. So you had a huge audience at that particular moment and parading into the oval basin
and there was a real excitement building up as everybody approached the oval basin. It was like a line up and then everyone had five minutes to go into the centre of the oval basin
and perform their stuff and then move and that was quite an exciting and a little bit of a nerve wracking thing because the audience was so big.
And I think every time we did that I was dancing so I was leading Street Dance Union doing that. Again in surfboards, another time in purple, flowing two piece trouser top suit with a massive purple Stetson.
We had that as well. And yeah so that was always quite bizarre, dancing perhaps like a Zulu dance in a big purple cowboy Stetson hat. When do you ever get to do that in the oval basin?
Truly intercultural arts.
Exactly, yeah. Yeah with a huge huge huge audience and that was really exciting. So yeah those parades stand out in my mind actually, the ones down to the bay.
We've got a kind of least favourite aspect of carnival.
I think no, except perhaps if I was pushed. The only memory that I didn't really enjoy so much was when it started from the bay and went to town.
The parade up Bute Street was quite tiring and quite empty and so that first leg was always a little bit, you know, not brilliant but it got you practising along the way by the time you got to town where there was a huge audience.
But no, no to be honest, no I don't have any kind of bad memories of carnival really.
What sort of changes have you seen over time?
It's more of a feeling. I think the feeling of carnival's changed. I think the essence has changed.
It could be put down to nostalgia because you think back very nostalgically to things you've done years back because you were a younger person with different aspirations and different perception on what you're doing.
Perhaps it could be that but I think the essence of carnival in Cardiff has changed. The team's changed so dramatically.
I think carnival is all about the team and the people who attend and obviously that evolves over the years. Everything evolves, it has to evolve.
I feel like the participation side of it has dropped massively so there's not as big participation as there used to be.
So yeah, I think there's that.
Yeah, and just a general feeling. It's changed a little bit but I think perhaps you do look at things a little bit differently as you get older as well.
What makes carnival for you?
Performing. It's not so much the making for me. It's the end result. It's the showing a huge either expecting or non-expecting audience.
It's a huge visual audio experience. It's that end thing, it's the performance and the wow factor for people just standing there watching.
That visual treat, that's what it is for me.
And the crazy aspect of people that you enjoy spending time with or getting together and wearing something ridiculous in the street and dancing through streets that you would normally go and do your shopping in as a normal member of the public.
Yeah, so that's what it is for me.
Thank you very much.
You're welcome.